Project Context Prompt – Real-Time Taxi Ride Streaming Data Engineering Pipeline

Project Aim
The aim of this project is to build a real-time data engineering pipeline that processes taxi ride events using streaming technologies. Instead of batch processing historical data, the system simulates live ride events and processes them in real time to compute analytics such as average fare and trip distance.

Problem Statement
Many transportation platforms generate large volumes of ride data every second. Traditional batch processing systems analyze this data only after it has been stored, which introduces delays in decision-making. Businesses need real-time insights to monitor ride demand, revenue, trip patterns, and system performance.

This project demonstrates how to build a real-time streaming architecture using Apache Kafka and Apache Spark Structured Streaming to process ride events as they occur.

Dataset
NYC Taxi Trip Records dataset is used. The dataset contains ride-level information including pickup time, dropoff time, passenger count, trip distance, and fare amount.

Architecture Overview

NYC Taxi Dataset
→ Python Kafka Producer (simulates live ride events)
→ Apache Kafka Topic (taxi_rides)
→ Apache Spark Structured Streaming Consumer
→ Real-Time Analytics (average fare and distance)
→ Console Output (current stage)
→ Cassandra Storage (future stage, with bronze, silver, gold implementation) 
→ Airflow Pipeline Orchestration (future stage)

Tools Used and Why

Python
Used to build the Kafka producer that streams taxi ride events from the dataset.

Apache Kafka
Used as the streaming message broker to handle real-time ride events.

Apache Spark Structured Streaming
Used to process streaming data from Kafka and compute analytics in micro-batches.

Java (OpenJDK)
Required runtime environment for Spark and Kafka.

Hadoop winutils (Windows support)
Required for running Spark properly on Windows systems.

Dataset Source
NYC Taxi Trip Records dataset.
Apache Cassandra – distributed NoSQL storage for streaming results
Apache Airflow – workflow orchestration and scheduling
Docker – containerization for deployment 

Project Folder Structure

taxistream/
producer/
producer.py
spark/
stream_processor.py
data/
taxi dataset files

Environment Setup Completed

Installed:
Java (OpenJDK)
Apache Spark
Apache Kafka
Hadoop winutils (for Windows)

Environment variables configured:
JAVA_HOME
SPARK_HOME
HADOOP_HOME

Path variables updated accordingly.

Kafka Setup

Kafka broker is running locally at:

localhost:9092

Kafka topic used:

taxi_rides

Implementation Completed So Far

1. Built a Python Kafka producer that reads the NYC taxi dataset and sends ride events as JSON messages to the Kafka topic "taxi_rides".

Producer example output:

Sent ride 1
Sent ride 2
...
Sent ride 49

2. Implemented a Spark Structured Streaming consumer using PySpark.

The Spark script reads streaming data from Kafka, converts the binary Kafka messages into JSON format, parses the taxi schema, and computes analytics.

Current analytics implemented:

Average fare amount
Average trip distance

3. Spark Structured Streaming is executed using the command:

spark-submit --packages org.apache.spark:spark-sql-kafka-0-10_2.12:3.5.8 spark/stream_processor.py 

4. When running the system:

Terminal 1 runs the Kafka producer:
python producer/producer.py

Terminal 2 runs the Spark streaming job.

Spark processes the incoming data in micro-batches and outputs analytics to the console.

Example Spark output:

Batch 11
avg(fare_amount)
avg(trip_distance)

Current Status

The streaming pipeline is working successfully with the following components:

Dataset → Kafka Producer → Kafka Topic → Spark Structured Streaming → Console Analytics

The system successfully simulates live taxi ride events and computes real-time statistics.
Kafka and Zookeeper are currently running using Docker Compose.


Remaining Work to Continue the Project 

The next stages of the project should include:

1. Add a persistent storage layer using Apache Cassandra to store processed streaming results.

2. Modify the Spark streaming job so that analytics results are written into Cassandra instead of only printing to the console.

3. Create Cassandra tables to store metrics such as:
   timestamp
   average_fare
   average_trip_distance

4. Integrate Apache Airflow to orchestrate and schedule the pipeline.

5. Optionally containerize the system using Docker so the pipeline can be deployed easily on other machines.

Goal of Next Step

The immediate next step is to connect the Spark Structured Streaming job to Cassandra and store the computed analytics in a database for persistent real-time data storage.
..........................
Continue helping build this real-time data engineering project from the current stage. The streaming pipeline from Kafka to Spark is already working. The next step is integrating Cassandra to persist analytics results. While integrating Cassandra, the pipeline should implement a Bronze–Silver–Gold architecture for raw events, cleaned data, and aggregated analytics.
Bronze layer – raw Kafka ride events stored without modification
Silver layer – cleaned and validated ride data (remove nulls, invalid values)
Gold layer – aggregated analytics such as average fare, average trip distance, ride count 
